---
title: The Missing Data of Theory and Metaphor-driven Agent-based Evolutionary
  Social Simulation
date: 2021-02-18T23:48:44.466Z
summary: my criticism on social theory-driven simulation.
draft: false
featured: false
image:
  filename: featured
  focal_point: Smart
  preview_only: false
---
> *Artificial life may already have achieved this goal (Note: The goal is "there's going to be more of something like poetry in the future of science" -- one of the founders of Artificial Life, Christopher Langton), according to the evolutionary biologist John Maynard Smith of the University of Sussex. Smith, who pioneered the use of mathematics in biology, took an early interest in work at the Santa Fe Institute and has twice spent a week visiting there. But he has concluded that artificial life is "basically a fact-free science." During his last visit, he recalls, "the only time a fact was mentioned was when I mentioned it, and that was considered to be in rather bad taste."*
>
> *By John Horgan. "[From complexity to perplexity.](http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/hogan.complexperplex.htm)" Scientific American, June 1995.*

I am a computational social scientist. I was previously within the [Artificial Life community](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_life), working on Agent-based Social Simulation. It is a historical sub-topic of computational social science (CSS). Basically, I use computer-based evolution and simulation leveraging the techniques like social networks, machine learning, and game theory to study social dynamics by building social theory and metaphor-driven agent interaction rules and investigating complexity in emergent collective behaviors (in case you are not familiar with "agent" or "agent-based model (ABM)," I would suggest these materials as a gentle introduction: **[My Post](https://www.carsonhlbao.com/publication/cooperation/)** and **[My old literature review for multiagent systems in social simulation: Decisions, learning, trust, and cooperation](https://www.academia.edu/49558503/Multiagent_Systems_in_Social_Simulation_Decisions_Learning_Trust_and_Cooperation)**). I did much work with evolutionary simulation productively. I led projects, had a good publication record in decent computer science conference proceedings and interdisciplinary journals, and was involved in multiple NSF funding applications. However, when I grow up to be more expertized in CSS and demonstrate a deep understanding of the field after working with some social scientists from an empirical perspective (e.g., [Winson Peng](https://comartsci.msu.edu/our-people/taiquan-winson-peng)), I have some new ideas.

***PURE*** evolutionary simulation with assumptions based on social theories and metaphors might be an elegant approach for theoretical social physicists, evolutionary biologists, and artificial life researchers. Still, it is somewhat obsolete and criticized as "fact-free science" in the data-driven era. Simulation-based CSS is a term of the late 1990s to early 2000s. Lazer et al. repositioned CSS as the computational analysis of data from a digital environment (Lazer 2009). One might argue that CSS is like the "blind men and an elephant," where you might have different conclusions viewed from different perspectives. I would endeavor the data-driven perspective viewed from my training in both ABM and CSS. Because many assumptions in an agent-based evolutionary simulation try to be elegant and realistic by striving to be more like physics, it is still hard to determine whether these physics-inspired general principles adequately capture the nature of social phenomena without a data-driven calibration/test. After all, in order to simulate a phenomenon, we might have dozens of different perspectives for building agent systems and theoretical models (aka the incoherency problem in developing social theories proposed by Watts 2017). While social simulation and artificial life communities (hilariously and forcefully) try to create an atmosphere of credibility by expressing their theories in mathematical formulas and evolutionary simulation rules, this effort does not change the fact that the basic ideas underpinning the fields are not based on empirical data, but largely **conceptual assumptions and metaphors**. Quite a lot of assumptions and metaphors are arbitrary modifications of concepts in physics and mathematization of our everyday experiences (which is exactly why they call themselves "social physics," though in modern use, "social physics" also refers to the data-driven analysis of social issues rather than physics rule-based evolutionary simulation). Inducting mechanisms behind data is a weirdly rather sour taste. Good taste is neither within a deductive system nor an inductive system: It's called "generativism," i.e., evolving novelties through modeling agent behaviors with established mechanisms or theories.

Nevertheless, things have changed. Social simulation/agent-based economics papers can rarely be found in top-tier data science/sociology/economics journals (They can still be found in some physics, evolutionary biology, and interdisciplinary journals). Because real-world found data, like web user trace and scraped online data by NLP/data mining, has posed a revolution in traditional social science. A simple choice is to harness these data capabilities with simulation and theoretical interpretations or be left behind in this research paradigm revolution. [Note: observational data isn't perfect. Some significant weaknesses of pure observational studies are confusing cause and effect, weak generalization ability, potential omitted variable biases, endogeneity/spurious correlation risks, privacy issues, data quality/validity/systematic error, etc. However, the weaknesses do not strip away the central role of data in the big data-driven and computational paradigm revolution. If you're interested in the causal inference community's criticism on purely observational data, please read **[Judea Pearl's brand-new paper](https://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/r502.pdf)**.] An agent-based simulation is a powerful technique if serving as an aid to human intuition and an option in the theoretical interpretation toolbox for the analysis of **unprecedented scenarios (e.g., counterfactuals)**, as the following insights of Doran, Gilbert, and Hales.

> *We can therefor hope to develop an abstract theory of multiple agent systems and then to transfer its insights to human social systems, without a priori commitment to existing particular social theory. (Doran 1998).*
>
> *Our stress... is on a new experimental methodology consisting of observing theoretical models performing on some testbed. Such a new methodology could be defined as 'exploratory simulation' ... (Gilbert 1995).*
>
> *Artificial societies do not aim to model real societies in any direct sense. They can be seen as an aid to intuition in which the researcher formalizes abstract and logical relationships between entities. (Hales 1998).*

This assertion is especially true now as we can deal with large dimensions of parameters in ABMs with current high-performance computing powers. Nevertheless, this kind of evolutionary simulation somewhat ignores the really fundamental social issues because it is firmly and naturally rooted in the objectivist tradition of the narrow "parameter-sociology" (Malsch 2001). Therefore, it should NOT be a whole picture of CSS at all. The ungrounded methodology of **relying on** ABM in social simulation is different from that of the current CSS community but echos the artificial life community. We can indeed see this fact: Viewed from methodology, objects of interest, conferences, etc., the social simulation community is fusing with artificial life and evolutionary computation communities. But CSS has been gradually more like data science and the real-world stuff (**"*computational social science is anything that's cool*" -- Matthew Salganik**). Back to the argument by Horgan at the very beginning of this post, social theory and metaphor-driven agent interaction rules and evolutionary simulation are pretty like the artificial life models, and the data in the real world is pretty like the "fact." Elegant physics-inspired assumptions, evolutionary simulation, and metaphorization are full of poetry while lacking prescriptive powers. Theory and the solution-oriented data-driven empirical study should be mainstream cornerstones. As with any new methodology and option in the toolbox, initial excitement over playing with possibilities, like many Monte-Carlo ABMs, must give way to (or at least align with) them.

Currently, I am working towards a grounded research direction focusing on the **real-world issues in CSS through cross-fertilizing observational (e.g., digital trace data), theoretical (e.g., simulation), and experimental (e.g., virtual labs) studies** and overcoming the weakness of any single methodology component. I believe this way is a complete picture to do impactful CSS. After all, computation is a means to an end. The end has to be found in the formal social theories, social research methods and design, causal inference, insightful explanations even predictions, etc., which remain the main melody of CSS. They are not contradictory trends but complementary (Monroe 2015). I particularly love this clever comparison, according to [Jonathan J. H. Zhu, 祝建華](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=q41vFFQAAAAJ&hl=en) at The City University of Hong Kong:

> ***The algorithm is the admission ticket which is important; data is the story which is more important; theory-centric social insight is the soul, which is the MOST important.***
>
> (Note: the original text in Chinese is "算法是入场券很重要，数据是故事更重要，理论是灵魂最重要。")

Computational social science, accordingly, should be a productive convergence of different fields (computing and social sciences), different methodologies (theoretical, observational, and experimental) beyond narrow methodological debates.

**References:**

**\[Doran 1998]** Doran, Jim. "Simulating collective misbelief." *Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation* 1.1 (1998): 3.

**\[Gilbert 1995]** Gilbert, Nigel, and Rosaria Conte. *Artificial Societies*. Taylor & Francis, 1995.

**\[Hales 1998]** Hales, David. "Artificial societies, theory building, and memetics." *Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Cybernetics, International Association for Cybernetics (IAC)*. 1998.

**\[Hilbert 2019]** Hilbert, Martin, et al. "Computational communication science: A methodological catalyzer for a maturing discipline." *International Journal of Communication* 13 (2019): 3912–3934.

**\[Lazer 2009]** Lazer, David, et al. "Computational social science." *Science* (New York, NY) 323.5915 (2009): 721-723.

**\[Malsch 2001]** Malsch, Thomas. "Naming the unnamable: Socionics or the sociological turn of/to distributed artificial intelligence." *Autonomous Agents and Multi-agent Systems* 4.3 (2001): 155-186.

**\[Monroe 2015]** Monroe, Burt L., et al. "No! Formal theory, causal inference, and big data are not contradictory trends in political science." *PS*: *Political Science & Politics* 48.1 (2015): 71-74.

**\[Watts 2017]** Watts, Duncan J. "Should social science be more solution-oriented?." *Nature Human Behavior* 1.1 (2017): 1-5.