---
title: My notes when I read papers
subtitle: ""
date: 2021-04-12T20:10:52.647Z
summary: my comments on the selected papers in a broad range of computational
  social science -- the science of science, communication & media, social data,
  networks, clever experiments, and so on...
draft: false
featured: false
image:
  filename: featured
  focal_point: Smart
  preview_only: false
---
Reading papers is my daily task. They build my social insights and methodological thinking. I am also careful to read too much into prior work because it might kill my creativity. Thus, I value the paper selection -- I appreciate the work which really inspires me. I will regularly update this page to collect and include my review, comments, and random thoughts when I encounter these inspiring papers luckily. Feel free to contact me for any discussions -- Random thoughts are not formal academic articles, so be tolerant of the format :)

1. **Notes** on Doucouliagos, Chris, and Tom D. Stanley. "Are all economic facts greatly exaggerated? Theory competition and selectivity." *Journal of Economic Surveys* 27.2 (2013): 316-339.
2. **A leap from the empirical evidence to the theoretical claim. A methodological note** on Lundberg I, Johnson R, Stewart BM. What Is your estimand? Defining the target quantity connects statistical evidence to theory. *American Sociological Review*. 2021;86(3):532-565.
3. **[A very clever and comprehensive experiment design combining naturally occurring experiment, counterfactual, correlation test, and original survey. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rM68bBndxk0ZLIZDtsD2tx5RTAfCRrR6C2oagFGA9Hg/edit?usp=sharing)** on ALRABABA’H, A., MARBLE, W., MOUSA, S., & SIEGEL, A. (2021). Can exposure to celebrities reduce prejudice? The effect of Mohamed Salah on Islamophobic behaviors and attitudes. *American Political Science Review,* 1-18.
4. **[Normative VS Strategic behaviors from a theory-driven perspective. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fw07exF-QZers14kFyN-97f4A_fBoY1qf6vR0PnCtgQ/edit?usp=sharing)** on Alberto Baccini, and Eugenio Petrovich. "Normative versus strategic accounts of acknowledgment data: The case of the top-five journals of economics." *arXiv:2105.12988v2*, and Peng, Tai‐Quan, and Jonathan JH Zhu. "Where you publish matters most: A multilevel analysis of factors affecting citations of internet studies." *Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology* 63.9 (2012): 1789-1803.
5. **[Knowledge module or playing with scientometrics statistics. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12j9L1VLTzxrCSpOkngMbhpQWMpoAxI6SqwxOiq05x1w/edit?usp=sharing)** on Weis, J.W., Jacobson, J.M. Learning on knowledge graph dynamics provides an early warning of impactful research. *Nature Biotechnology* (2021). 
6. **[Misinformation in the Science of Science. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sT-oseC9EVJUbXNXmLZn2tWmftyoFkYumTtr-7voH4A/edit?usp=sharing)** on West, Jevin D., and Carl T. Bergstrom. "Misinformation in and about science." *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences* 118.15 (2021).
7. **[Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1E6Idk6wvX1yZkQtt74o_LO753MmSSfJT8j_yHfjyopk/edit?usp=sharing)** on Watts, Duncan J., David M. Rothschild, and Markus Mobius. "Measuring the news and its impact on democracy." *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences* 118.15 (2021)
8. **[Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13urhFb0HOk2Ah75m_y7Yzlh0X9ZeqKFu2HdY0SI4L0o/edit?usp=sharing)** and **[my slides](https://www.dropbox.com/s/atmm1d8tkhca2su/Presentation_honglin.pptx?dl=0)** on the work from Morteza Dehghani's group at USC psychology: "The big, the bad, and the ugly: Geographic estimation with flawed psychological data." *Psychological Methods* 25.4 (2020): 412, "Bound in hatred: The role of group-based morality in acts of hate." *PsyArXiv Preprints* (2019), and "Moral concerns are differentially observable in language." *Cognition* 212 (2021): 104696.
9. **[Weak ties. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iEJisbx1SUmeFBFMRKi2SNXBpM0D74BcUHgpb7kIb74/edit?usp=sharing)** on Mukerjee, Subhayan, Tian Yang, and Sandra González-Bailón. "What counts as a weak tie? A comparison of filtering techniques for weighted networks." *A Comparison of Filtering Techniques for Weighted Networks* (April 8, 2019).
10. **[Networks in a general sense (human capital and market). Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1d48_RqVz-7pBdyerMhx5VZUcPwSaS6G-RYBY1RBDdGE/edit?usp=sharing)** on Leonardi, Paul, and Noshir Contractor. "Better people analytics." *Harvard Business Review* 96.6 (2018): 70-81, and Jacobs, Abigail Z., and Duncan J. Watts. "A large-scale comparative study of informal social networks in firms." *Management Science* (2021).
11. **[The role of discussion in scientific productivity. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tZik2EL_YxshCLdMJN3BtBK-6H-kTgggsb3xs8GYTqE/edit?usp=sharing)** on Rose, Michael E., Co-Pierre Georg, and Daniel C. Opolot. "Discussants." *Max Planck Institute for Innovation & Competition Research Paper* 20-19 (2020).
12. **[Is social network/social media polarized as we thought? Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nqBvLI-mjJOfFdFQ7FZ8BUjgAtVxsEQbOtTAolm78jo/edit?usp=sharing)** on Arvidsson et al., "The Trojan-horse mechanism: How networks reduce gender segregation," *Science Advances* (2021), Shore et al., "Network structure and patterns of information diversity on Twitter," *MIS Quarterly* (2018), Wu et al., "Cross-partisan discussions on YouTube: Conservatives talk to liberals but liberals don't talk to conservatives," *AAAI-ICWSM* (2021), and Ruggeri et al., "The general fault in our fault lines," *Nature Human Behavior*, April 2021.
13. **[Sparse information for Tweeter user stance inference. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yHTyJK6cf6wOleXhdeA6s0KhJDibWVlWt71TcWEiROI/edit?usp=sharing)** on Samih, Younes, and Kareem Darwish. "A few topical Tweets are enough for effective user stance detection." *Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume*. 2021.
14. **[The power of mobile phone metadata. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1DxiiwjtAF06f-kldl6wXxbPxyGR5Q7kli0vq5ga9Pgo/edit?usp=sharing)** on Blumenstock, Joshua, Gabriel Cadamuro, and Robert On. "Predicting poverty and wealth from mobile phone metadata." *Science,* 2015, Wang, Yuxia, et al. "Migration patterns in China extracted from mobile positioning data." *Habitat International,* 2019, and Xu, Jun, et al. "Difference of urban development in China from the perspective of passenger transport around Spring Festival." *Applied Geography,* 2017.
15. **[How to measure innovation? Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dEt1CA1rZ2eM9h1LcoBCGd4u7W5oixQfdl5MGGCrYrg/edit?usp=sharing)** on the series of work by Mikko Packalen (Age and the trying out of new ideas, NIH funding and the pursuit of edge science, and Edge factors: Scientific frontier positions of nations), Wu, Lingfei, et al. "Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology." *Nature* (2019), Zeng, An, et al. "Fresh teams are associated with original and multidisciplinary research." *Nature Human Behavior* (2021), Soda, Giuseppe Beppe, et al. "Networks, creativity, and time: Staying creative through brokerage and network rejuvenation." *Academy of Management Journal* (2021), and Uzzi, Brian, et al. "Atypical combinations and scientific impact." *Science* (2013).
16. **[Political communication and toxicity. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17NuWm7h1P_pWX_U8g1hgFWrMi9Q6FcgAW8Y3bRZd4m8/edit?usp=sharing)** on Rajadesingan, Ashwin, Ceren Budak, and Paul Resnick. "Political discussion is abundant in non-political subreddits (and less toxic)." *arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09560* (2021), Wojcieszak, Magdalena E., and Diana C. Mutz. "Online groups and political discourse: Do online discussion spaces facilitate exposure to political disagreement?." *Journal of Communication* 59.1 (2009): 40-56, and Ventura, T., Munger, K., McCabe, K., & Chang, K.-C., Connective effervescence and streaming chat during political debates. *Journal of Quantitative Description: Digital Media*, 1 (2021).
17. **[Different behaviors in social media. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhMzVBUErS6z85fTkz5CQmrlDmsoaH3rlSQYuOaqges/edit?usp=sharing)** on Shugars, S., Gitomer, A., McCabe, S., Gallagher, R. J., Joseph, K., Grinberg, N., Doroshenko, L., Foucault Welles, B., & Lazer, D. (2021). Pandemics, protests, and publics: Demographic activity and engagement on Twitter in 2020. *Journal of Quantitative Description*: *Digital Media*, 1.
18. **[How to detect bots on social media? What roles do they play? Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CWwYyO6MX25JawrJvk4dctAxJ_sSPi_nla-Umjpj96U/edit?usp=sharing)** on González-Bailón, Sandra, and Manlio De Domenico. "Bots are less central than verified accounts during contentious political events." *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences* 118.11 (2021), and Mesnards, Nicolas Guenon des, et al. "Detecting bots and assessing their impact in social networks." *arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12398* (2018).
19. **[A new representation of knowledge: The edges between different fields. Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zx7mq7K8yH5Sadv8WLZN02P5718lCyMH_-BkxFQhaek/edit?usp=sharing)** on Peng, Hao, et al. "Neural embeddings of scholarly periodicals reveal complex disciplinary organizations." *Science Advances* 7.17 (2021): eabb9004.